




Sanctification
By
Adam Clarke 



Publishing House of the
Pentecostal Chubch of the Nazaeene
2109 Troost Avenue
Kansas City,
Missouri 





CONTENTS 

CHAPTER.                             PAGE. 

I. Definitions ....................... 5
II. Sin a Disease of the Soul ....... 12
III. Objections ..................... 15
IV. St. Paul Misunderstood .......... 21
V. The Fullness of God .............. 27
YI. Salvation From Sin .............. 31
VII. The Remedy Adequate ............ 37
VIII. Why We Should Be Holy ......... 40
IX. A Test .......................... 44
X. Necessity of Sanctification ...... 51
XI. Some Misconceptions ............. 55
XII. The Blessing Obtainable Now .... 60 





SANCTIFICATION 

CHAPTER I. 

DEFINITIONS 

The word "sanctify" has two meanings. 1. It signifies to consecrate, to separate 
from earth and common use, and to devote or dedicate to God and his service. 2. 
It signifies to make holy or pure. 

Many talk much, and indeed well, of what Christ has done for us; but how little 
is spoken of what he is to do in us! and yet all that he has done for us is in 
reference to what he is to do in us. He was incarnated, suffered, died, and rose 
again from the dead; ascended to heaven, and there appears in the presence of 
God for us. These were all saving, atoning, and mediating acts for us; that he 
might reconcile us to God; that he might blot out our sin; that he might purge 
our consciences from dead works; that he might bind the strong man armed — take 
away the armor in which he trusted, wash the polluted heart, destroy every foul 
and abominable desire, all tormenting and unholy tempers; that he might make the 
heart his throne, fill the soul with his light, power, and life; and, in a word, 
"destroy the works of the devil." These are done in us; without which we can not 
be saved unto eternal life. But these acts done in us are consequent on the acts 
done for us; for had He not been incarnated, suffered, and died in our stead, we 
could not receive either pardon or holiness; and did he not cleanse and purify 
our hearts, we could not enter into the place where all is purity; for the 
beatific vision is given to them only who are purified from all unrighteousness; 
for it is written, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." 
Nothing is purified by death; nothing in the grave; nothing in heaven. The 
living stones of the temple, like those of that at Jerusalem, are hewn, squared, 
and cut here, in the Church militant, to prepare them to enter into the 
composition of the Church triumphant. 

This perfection is the restoration of man to the state of holiness from which he 
fell, by creating him anew in Christ Jesus, and restoring to him that image and 
likeness of God which he has lost. A higher meaning than this it can not have; a 
lower meaning it must not have. God made man in that degree of perfection which 
was pleasing to his own infinite wisdom and goodness. Sin defaced this divine 
image; Jesus came to restore it. Sin must have no triumph; and the Bedeemer of 
mankind must have his glory. But if man be not perfectly saved from all sin, sin 
does triumph, and Satan exult, because they have done a mischief that Christ 
either can not or will not remove. To say he can not, would be shocking 
blasphemy against the infinite power and dignity of the great Creator; to say he 
will not, would be equally such against the infinite benevolence and holiness of 
his nature. All sin, whether in power, guilt, or defilement, is the work of the 
devil; and he, Jesus came to destroy the work of the devil; and as all 
unrighteousness is sin, so his blood cleanseth from all sin, because it 
cleanseth from all unrighteousness. 

Many stagger at the term perfection in Christianity; because they think that 
what is implied in it is inconsistent with a state of probation, and savors of 
pride and presumption; but we must take good heed how we stagger at any word of 
God; and much more how we deny or fritter away the meaning of any of his 
sayings, lest he reprove us, and we be found liars before him. But it may be 
that the term is rejected because it is not understood. Let us examine its 
import. 

The word "perfection," in reference to any person or thing, signifies that such 
person or thing is complete or finished; that it has nothing redundant, and is 
in nothing defective. And hence the observation of a learned civilian is at once 
both correct and illustrative, namely, "We count those things perfect which want 
nothing requisite for the end whereto they were instituted." And to be 'perfect 
often signifies "to be blameless, clear, irreproachable;" and, according to the 
above definition of Hooker, a man may be said to be perfect who answers the end 
for which God made him; and as God requires every man to love him with all his 
heart, soul, mind, and strength, and his neighbor as himself; then he is a 
perfect man that does so; he answers the end for which God made him; and this is 
more evident from the nature of that love which fills his heart; for as love is 
the principle of obedience, so he that loves his God with all his powers will 
obey him with all his powers; and he who loves his neighbor as himself will not 
only do no injury to him, but, on the contrary, labor to promote his best 
interests. Why the doctrine which enjoins such a state of perfection as this 
should be dreaded, or ridiculed, or despised, is a most strange thing; and the 
opposition to it can only be from that carnal mind that is enmity to God; "that 
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be." And had I no other 
proof that man is fallen from God, his opposition to Christian holiness would be 
to me sufficient. 

The whole design of God was to restore man to his image, and raise him from the 
ruins of his fall; in a word, to make him perfect; to blot out all his sins, 
purify his soul, and fill him with holiness; so that no unholy temper, evil 
desire, or impure affection or passion shall either lodge, or have any being 
within him; this, and this only, is true religion, or Christian perfection; and 
a less salvation than this would be dishonorable to the sacrifice of Christ, and 
the operation of the Holy Ghost; and would be as unworthy the appellation of 
"Christianity," as it would be of that of "holiness or perfection." They who 
ridicule this are scoffers at the word of God; many of them totally irreligious 
men, sitting in the seat of the scornful. They who deny it, deny the whole scope 
and design of divine revelation and the mission of Jesus Christ. And they who 
preach the opposite doctrine, are either speculative Antinomians, or pleaders 
for Baal. 

When St. Paul says he "warns every man, and teaches every man in all wisdom, 
that he may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus," he must mean something. 
What, then, is this something? It must mean "that holiness without which none 
shall see the Lord.' Call it by what name we please, it must imply the pardon of 
all transgression, and the removal of the whole body of sin and death; for this 
must take place before we can be like him, and see him as he is, in the 
effulgence of his own glory. This fitness, then, to appear before God, and 
thorough preparation for eternal glory, is what I plead for, pray for, and 
heartily recommend to all true believers, under the name of Christian 
perfection. Had I a better name, one more energetic, one with a greater 
plentitude of meaning, one more worthy of the efficacy of the blood that bought 
our peace, and cleanseth from all unrighteousness, I would gladly adopt and use 
it. Even the word "perfection" has, in some relations, so many qualifications 
and abatements that can not comport with that full and glorious salvation 
recommended in the gospel, and bought and sealed by the blood of the cross, that 
I would gladly lay it by, and employ a word more positive and unequivocal in its 
meaning, and more worthy of the merit of the infinite atonement of Christ, and 
of the energy of the almighty Spirit; but there is none in our language; which I 
deplore as an inconvenience and a loss. 

Why, then, are there so many, even among sincere and godly ministers and people, 
who are so much opposed to the term, and so much alarmed at the profession? I 
answer, Because they think no man can be fully saved from sin in this life. I 
ask, Where is this, in unequivocal words, written in the New Testament? Where, 
in that book, is it intimated that sin is never wholly destroyed till death 
takes place, and the soul and the body are separated? No where. In the Popish, 
baseless doctrine of purgatory, this doctrine, not with more rational 
consequences, is held — this doctrine allows that, so inveterate is sin, it can 
not be wholly destroyed, even in death; and that a penal fire, in a middle state 
between heaven and hell, is necessary to atone for that which the blood of 
Christ has not canceled; and to purge from that which the energy of the almighty 
Spirit had not cleansed before death. 





CHAPTER II. 

SIN A DISEASE OF THE SOUL 

Even Papists could not see that a moral evil was detained in the soul through 
its physical connection with the body; and that it required the dissolution of 
this physical connection before the moral contagion could be removed. 
Protestants, who profess, and most certainly possess, a better faith, are they 
alone that maintain the death-bed purgatory; and how positively do they hold out 
death as the complete deliverer from all corruption, and the final destroyer of 
sin, as if it were revealed in every page of the Bible! Whereas, there is not 
one passage in the sacred volume that says any such thing. Were this true, then 
death, far from being the last enemy, would be the last and best friend, and the 
greatest of all deliverers; for if the last remains of all the indwelling sin of 
all believers is to be destroyed by death — and a fearful mass this will make — 
then death, that removes it, must be the highest benefactor of mankind. The 
truth is, he is neither the cause nor the means of its destruction. It is the 
blood of Jesus alone that cleanseth from all unrighteousness. 

It is supposed that indwelling sin is useful even to true believers, because it 
humbles them and keeps them low in their own estimation. A little examination 
will show that this is contrary to the fact. It is generally, if not universally 
allowed, that pride is of the essence of sin, if not its very essence; and the 
root whence all moral obliquity flows. How, then, can pride humble us? Is not 
this absurd? Where is there a sincere Christian, be his creed what it may, that 
does not deplore his proud, rebellious, and unsubdued heart and will, as the 
cause of all his wretchedness; the thing that mars his best sacrifices, and 
prevents his communion with God? How often do such people say or sing, both in 
their public and private devotions: 

"But pride, that busy sin,
Spoils all that I perform!" 

Were there no pride, there would be no sin; and the heart from which it is cast 
out has the humility, meekness, and gentleness of Christ implanted in its stead. 

But still it is alleged, as an indubitable fact, that "a man is humbled under a 
sense of indwelling sin." I grant that they who see, and feel, and deplore their 
indwelling sin, are humbled; but is it the sin that humbles? No. It is the grace 
of God, that shows and condemns the sin, that humbles us. Neither the devil nor 
his work will ever show themselves. Pride works frequently under a dense mask, 
and will often assume the garb of humility. How true is that saying, and of how 
many is it the language: 

"Proud I am my wants to see —
Proud of my humility!" 

And, to conceal his working, even Satan himself is transformed into an angel of 
light! It appears then that we attribute this boasted humiliation to a wrong 
cause. We never are humbled under a sense of indwelling sin till the Spirit of 
God drags it to the light, and shows us, not only its horrid deformity, but its 
hostility to God; and he manifests it that he may take it away; but a false 
opinion causes men to hug the monster, and to contemplate their chains with 
complacency!





CHAPTER III 

OBJECTIONS 

It has been objected to this perfection, this perfect work of God in the soul, 
that "the greater sense we have of our own sinfulness, the more will Christ be 
exalted in the eye of the soul; for, if the thing were possible that a man might 
be cleansed from all sin in this life, he would feel no need of a Savior; Christ 
would be undervalued by him as no longer needing his saving power." This 
objection mistakes the whole state of the case. How is Christ exalted in the v
iew of the soul? How is it that he becomes precious to us? Is it not from a 
sense of what he has done for us; and what he has done in us? Did any man ever 
love God till he had felt that God loved him? Do we not "love him because he 
first loved us?" Is it the name Jesus that is precious to us? or Jesus the 
Savior saving us from our sins? Is all our confidence placed in him because of 
some one saving act? or, because of his continual operation as the Savior? Can 
any effect subsist without its cause? Must not the cause continue to operate in 
order to maintain the effect? Do we value a good cause more for the 
instantaneous production of a good and important effect, than we do for its 
continual energy, exerted to maintain that good and important effect? All these 
questions can be answered by a child. What is it that cleanseth the soul and 
destroys sin? Is it not the mighty power of the grace of God? What is it that 
keeps the soul clean? Is it not the same power dwelling in us? No more can an 
effect subsist without its cause, than a sanctified soul abide in holiness 
without the indwelling Sanctifier? When Christ casts out the strong-armed man, 
he takes away that armor in which he trusted, he spoils his goods, he cleanses 
and enters into the house, so that the heart becomes the habitation of God 
through the Spirit. Can then a man undervalue that Christ who not only blotted 
out his iniquity, but cleansed his soul from all sin; and whose presence and 
inward, mighty working constitute all his holiness and all his happiness? 
Impossible! Jesus was never so highly valued, so intensely loved, so 
affectionately obeyed, as now. The great Savior has not his highest glory from 
his atoning and redeeming acts, but from the manifestation of his saving power. 

"But the persons who profess to have been made thus perfect are proud and 
supercilious, and their whole conduct says to their neighbor, 'Stand by, I am 
holier than thou.'" No person that acts so has ever received this grace. He is 
either a hypocrite or a self-deceiver. Those who have received it are full of 
meekness, gentleness, and long-suffering; they love God with all their hearts, 
they love even their enemies; love the whole human family, and are servants of 
all. They know they have nothing but what they have received. In the splendor of 
God's holiness they feel themselves absorbed. They have neither light, power, 
love, nor happiness, but from their indwelling Savior. Their holiness, though it 
fills the soul, yet is only a drop from the infinite Ocean. The flame of their 
love, though it penetrate their whole being, is only a spark from the 
incomprehensible Sun of righteousness. In a spirit and in a way which none but 
themselves can fully comprehend and feel, they can say and sing: 

"I loathe myself when God I see,
And into nothing fall;
Content that Christ exalted be,
And God is all in all." 

It has been no small mercy to me, that, in the course of my religious life, I 
have met with many persons who professed that the blood of Christ had saved them 
from all sin, and whose profession was maintained by an immaculate life; but I 
never knew one of them that was not of the spirit above above described. They 
were men of the strongest faith, the purest love, the holiest affections, the 
most obedient lives, and the most useful in society. I have seen such walking 
with God for many years: and as I had the privilege of observing their walk in 
life, so have I been privileged with their testimony at death, when their sun 
appeared to grow broader and brighter at its setting; and, though they came 
through great tribulation, they found that their robes were washed and made 
white through the blood of the Lamb. They fully witnessed the grand effects 
which in this life flow from justification, adoption, and sanctification; 
namely, assurance of God's love, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, 
increase of grace, and perseverance in the same to the end of their lives. O 
God! let my death be like that of these righteous, and let my end be like 
theirs! Amen. 

It is scarcely worth mentioning another objection that has been started by the 
ignorant, the worthless, and the wicked. "The people that profess this leave 
Christ out of the question. They either think that they have purified their own 
hearts, or that they have gained their pretended perfection by their own 
merits." Nothing can be more false than this calumny. I know that people well in 
whose creed the doctrine of "salvation from all sin in this life" is a prominent 
article. But that people hold most conscientiously that all our salvation, from 
the first dawn of light in the soul to its entry into the kingdom of glory, is 
all by and through Christ. He alone convinces the soul of sin, justifies the 
ungodly, sanctifies the unholy, preserves in this state of salvation, and brings 
to everlasting blessedness. No soul ever was or can be saved but through his 
agony and bloody sweat, his cross and passion, his death and burial, his 
glorious resurrection and ascension, and continued intercession at the right 
hand of God. 

If men would but spend as much time in fervently calling upon God to cleanse the 
blood that he has not cleansed, as they spend in decrying this doctrine, what a 
glorious state of the Church should we soon witness! Instead of compounding with 
iniquity, and tormenting their minds to find out with how little grace they may 
be saved, they would renounce the devil and all his works; and be determined 
never to rest till they had found that He had bruised him under their feet, and 
that the blood of Christ had cleansed them from all unrighteousness. Why is it 
that men will not try how far God will save them? nor leave off praying and 
believing for more and more, till they find that God has held his hand? When 
they find that their agonizing faith and prayer receive no farther answer, then, 
and not till then, they may conclude that God will be no farther gracious, and 
that he will not save to the uttermost them who come to him through Christ 
Jesus. 





CHAPTER IV. 

ST. PAUL MISUNDERSTOOD 

But it is farther objected, that even St. Paul himself denies this doctrine of 
perfection, disclaiming it in reference to himself: "Not as though I had already 
attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after." Phil. iii, 12. This 
place is mistaken; the apostle is not speaking of his restoration to the image 
of God, but to completing his ministerial course, and receiving the crown of 
martyrdom. His meaning is I have not yet received the prize; I am not glorified, 
for I have not finished my course; and I have a conflict still to maintain. Nor 
am I as yet perfect; I am not yet crowned, in consequence of having suffered 
martyrdom. He is not here speaking of any deficiency in his own grace, or 
spiritual state; he does not mean by not being yet perfect, that he had a body 
of sin and death cleaving to him, and was still polluted with indwelling sin, as 
some have most falsely and dangerously imagined; he speaks of his not having 
terminated his course by martyrdom, which he knew would sooner or later be the 
case. This he considered as the perfection of his whole career, and was led to 
view every thing as imperfect or unfinished till this had taken place. There is 
another point that has been produced, at least indirectly, in the form of an 
objection to this doctrine. "Where are those adult, those perfect Christians? We 
know none such; but we have heard that some persons professing those 
extraordinary degrees of holiness have become scandalous in their lives." When a 
question of this kind is asked by one who fears God, and earnestly desires his 
salvation, and only wishes to have full evidence that the thing is attainable, 
that he may shake himself from the dust, and arise and go out, and possess the 
good land — it deserves to be seriously answered. To such I would say, There may 
be several, even in the circle of your own religious acquaintance, whose evil 
tempers and unholy affections God has destroyed; and having filled them with his 
own holiness, they are enabled to love him with all their heart, soul, mind, and 
strength; and their neighbor as themselves. But such make no public professions; 
their conduct, their spirit, the whole tenor of their life, is their testimony. 
Again: there may be none such among your religious acquaintance, because they do 
not know their privilege, or they unfortunately sit under a ministry where the 
doctrine is decried; and in such congregations and Churches holiness never 
abounds; men are too apt to be slothful, and unfaithful to the grace they have 
received; they need not their minister's exhortations to beware of looking for 
or expecting a heart purified from all unrighteousness; striving or agonizing to 
"enter in at the strait gate" is not pleasant work to flesh and blood; and they 
are glad to have any thing to countenance their spiritual indolence; and such 
ministers have always a powerful coadjutor; the father of lies, and the spirit 
of error will work in the unrenewed heart, filling it with darkness, and 
prejudice, and unbelief. No wonder, then, that in such places, and under such a 
ministry, there is no man that can be "presented perfect in Christ Jesus." But 
wherever the trumpet gives a certain sound, and the people go forth to battle, 
headed by the Captain of their salvation, there the foe is routed, and genuine 
believers brought into the liberty of the children of God. 

As to some having professed to have received this salvation, and afterwards 
become scandalous in their lives — though in all my long ministerial labors, and 
extensive religious acquaintance, I never found but one example — I would just 
observe that they might possibly have been deceived; thought they had what they 
had not; or they might have become unfaithful to that grace and lost it; and 
this is possible through the whole range of a state of probation. There have 
been angels who kept not their first estate; and we all know, to our cost, that 
he who was the head and fountain of the whole human family, who was made in the 
image and likeness of God, sinned against God and fell from that state. And so 
may any of his descendants fall from any degree of the grace of God while in 
their state of probation; and any man and every man must fall, whenever he or 
they cease to watch unto prayer, and cease to be "workers together with God." 
Faith must ever be kept in lively exercise, working by love; and that love is 
only safe when found exerting its energies in the path of obedience. An 
objection of this kind against the doctrine of Christian perfection will apply 
as forcibly against the whole revelation of God as it can do against one of the 
doctrines; because that revelation brings the account of the defection of angels 
and of the fall of man. The truth is, no doctrine of God stands upon the 
knowledge, experience, faithfulness, or unfaithfulness of man; it stands on the 
veracity of God who gave it. If there were not a man to be found who was 
justified freely through the redemption that is by Jesus, yet the doctrine of 
"justification by faith" is true; for it is a doctrine that stands on the truth 
of God. And suppose not one could be found in all the Churches of Christ whose 
heart was purified from all unrighteousness, and who loved God and man with all 
his regenerated powers, yet the doctrine of Christian perfection would still be 
true; for Christ was manifested that he might destroy the work of the devil; and 
his blood cleanseth from all unrighteousness. And suppose every man be a liar, 
God is true. 

It is not the profession of a doctrine that establishes its truth; it is the 
truth of God, from which it has proceeded. Man's experience may illustrate it; 
but it is God's truth that confirms it. 

In all cases of this nature, we must forever cease from man, implicitly credit 
God's testimony, and look to Him in and through whom all the promises of God are 
yea and amen. 

To be filled with God is a great thing; to be filled with the fullness of God is 
still greater; to be filled with all the fullness of God is greatest of all. 
This utterly bewilders the sense and confounds the understanding, by leading at 
once to consider the immensity of God, the infinitude of his attributes, and the 
absolute perfection of each! But there must be a sense in which even this 
wonderful petition was understood by the apostle, and may be comprehended by us. 
Most people, in quoting these words, endeavor to correct or explain the apostle 
by adding the word communicable. But this is as idle as it is useless and 
impertinent. Reason surely tells us that St. Paul would not pray that they 
should be filled with what could not be communicated. The apostle certainly 
meant what he said, and would be understood in his own meaning; and we may soon 
see what this meaning is. 





CHAPTER V. 

THE FULLNESS OF GOD 

By the "fullness of God," we are to understand all the gifts and graces which he 
has promised to bestow on man in order to his full salvation here, and his being 
fully prepared for the enjoyment of glory hereafter. To be filled with all the 
fullness of God is to have the heart emptied of and cleansed from all sin and 
defilement, and filled with humility, meekness, gentleness, goodness, justice, 
holiness, mercy, and truth, and love to God and man. And that this implies a 
thorough emptying of the soul of every thing that is not of God, and leads not 
to him, is evident from this, that what God fills neither sin nor Satan can 
fill, nor in any wise occupy; for, if a vessel be filled with one fluid or 
substance, not a drop or particle of any other kind can enter it, without 
displacing the same quantum of the original matter as that which is afterward 
introduced. God can not be said to fill the whole soul while any place, part, 
passion, or faculty is filled, or less or more occupied by sin or Satan: and as 
neither sin nor Satan can be where God fills and occupies the whole, so the 
terms of the prayer state that Satan shall neither have any dominion over that 
soul nor being in it. A fullness of humility precludes all pride; of meekness, 
precludes anger; of gentleness, all ferocity; of goodness, all evil; of justice, 
all injustice; of holiness, all sin; of mercy, all unkindness and revenge; of 
truth, all falsity and dissimulation: and where God is loved with all the heart, 
soul, mind, and strength, there is no room for enmity or hatred to him, or to 
any thing connected with him; so, where a man loves his neighbor as himself, no 
ill shall be worked to that neighbor; but, on the contrary, every kind action, 
so far as power and circumstances can permit, will be done to him. Thus the 
being filled with God's fullness will produce constant pious, and affectionate 
obedience to him, and unvarying benevolence toward one's neighbor; that is, any 
man, any and every human being. Such a man is saved from all sin; the law is 
fulfilled in him; and he ever possesses and acts under the influence of that 
love to God and man which is the fulfilling of the law. It is impossible, with 
any Scriptural or rational consistency, to understand these words in any lower 
sense; but how much more they imply — and more they do imply — who can tell? 

Many preachers, and multitudes of professing people, are studious to find out 
how many imperfections and infidelities, and how much inward sinfulness, are 
consistent with a safe state of religion; but how few, very few, are bringing 
out the fair Gospel standard to try the height of the members of the Church; 
whether they be fit for the heavenly army; whether their stature be such as 
qualifies them for the ranks of the Church militant! "the measure of the stature 
of the fullness" is seldom seen; the measure of the stature of littleness, 
dwarfishness, and emptiness, is often exhibited. 

Some say, "The body of sin in believers is, indeed, an enfeebled, conquered, and 
deposed tyrant, and the stroke of death finishes its destruction." So, then, the 
death of Christ and the in fluences of the Holy Spirit were only sufficient to 
depose and enfeeble the tyrant sin; but our death must come in to effect his 
total destruction! Thus our death is, at least partially, our Savior; and thus 
that which was an effect of sin — "for sin entered into the world, and death by 
sin" — becomes the means of finally destroying it; that is, the effect of a 
cause can become so powerful as to react upon that cause and produce its 
annihilation! The divinity and philosophy of this sentiment are equally absurd. 
It is the blood of Christ alone that cleanses from all unrighteousness; and the 
sanctification of a believer is no more dependent on death than his 
justification. If it be said that "believers do not cease from sin till they 
die," I have only to say that they are such believers as do not make a proper 
use of their faith: and what can be said more of the whole herd of transgressors 
and infidels? They cease to sin when they cease to breathe. If the Christian 
religion bring no other privileges than this to its upright followers, well may 
we ask, "Wherein doth the wise man differ from the fool, for they have both one 
end?" But the whole Gospel teaches a contrary doctrine. 





CHAPTER VI. 

SALVATION FROM SIN 

It is strange there should be found a person believing the whole Gospel system 
and yet living in sin! "Salvation from sin" is the long-continued sound, as it 
is the spirit and design, of the Gospel. Our Christian name, our baptismal 
covenant, our profession of faith in Christ, and avowed belief in his word, all 
call us to this: can it be said that we have any louder calls than they? Our 
self-interest, as it respects the happiness of a godly life, and the glories of 
eternal blessedness — the pains and wretchedness of a life of sin, leading to 
the worm that never dies, and the fire that is not quenched — second, most 
powerfully, the above calls. Reader, lay these things to heart, and answer this 
question to God: "How shall I escape if I neglect so great salvation?" And then, 
as thy conscience shall answer, let thy mind and thy hand begin to act. 

As there is no end to the merits of Christ incarnated and crucified; no bounds 
to the mercy and love of God; no let or hindrance to the almighty energy' and 
sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit; no limits to the improvability of the 
human soul; so there can be no bounds to the saving influence which God will 
dispense to the heart of every genuine believer. We may ask and receive, and our 
joy shall be full! Well may we bless and praise God, "who has called us into 
such a state of salvation;" a state in which we may be thus saved; and, by the 
grace of that state, continue in the same to the end of our lives! 

As sin is the cause of the ruin of mankind, the Gospel system, which exhibits 
its cure, is fitly called "good news, or glad tidings;" and it is good news, 
because it proclaims Him who saves his people from their sins; and it would 
indeed be dishonorable to that grace, and the infinite merit of Him who procured 
it, to suppose, much more to assert, that sin had made wounds which grace would 
not heal. Of such a triumph Satan shall ever be deprived. 

"He that committeth sin is of the devil." Hear this, ye who plead for Baal, and 
can not bear the thought of that doctrine that states believers are to be saved 
from all sin in this life! He who committeth sin is a child of the devil, and 
shows that he has still the nature of the devil in him; "for the devil sinneth 
from the beginning:" he was the father of sin — brought sin into the world, and 
maintains sin in the world by living in the hearts of his own children, and thus 
leading them to transgression; and persuading others that they can not be saved 
from their sins in this life, that he may secure a continual residence in their 
heart. He also knows that if he has a place throughout life he will probably 
have it at death; and, if so, throughout eternity. 

"That is," say some, "he does not sin habitually as he formerly did." This is 
bringing the influence and privileges of the heavenly birth very low indeed. We 
have the most indubitable evidence that many of the heathen philosophers had 
acquired, by mental discipline and cultivation, an entire ascendency over all 
their wonted vicious habits. Perhaps my reader will recollect the story of the 
physiognomist, who, coming into the place where Socrates was delivering a 
lecture, his pupils, wishing to put the principles of the man's science to 
proof, desired him to examine the face of their master, and say what was his 
moral character was. After a full contemplation of the philosopher's visage, he 
pronounced him "the most gluttonous, drunken, brutal, and libidinous old man he 
had ever met." As the character of Socrates was the reverse of all this, his 
disciples began to insult the physiognomist. Socrates interfered, and said, "The 
principles of his science may be very correct; for such I was, but I have 
conquered it by my philosophy." O ye Christian divines! ye real or pretended 
Gospel ministers! will ye allow the influence of the grace of Christ a sway not 
even so extensive as that of the philosophy of a heathen who never heard of the 
true God? 

Many tell us that "no man can be saved from sin in this life." Will these 
persons permit us to ask, How much sin may we be saved from in this life? 
Something must be ascertained on this subject: 1. That the soul may have some 
determinate object in view. 2. That it may not lose its time, or employ its 
faith and energy, in praying for what is impossible to be attained. Now, as 
Christ was manifested to take away our sins, to destroy the works of the devil, 
and as his blood cleanseth from all sin and unrighteousness, is it not evident 
that God means that believers in Christ shall be saved from all sin? For if his 
blood cleanses from all sin, if he destroys the works of the devil — and sin is 
the work of the devil — and if he who is born of God does not commit sin, then 
he must be cleansed from all sin; and while he continues in that state he lives 
without sinning against God, for the seed of God remaineth in him, and he can 
not sin, because he is born, or begotten, of God. 

How strangely warped and blinded by prejudice and system must men be who, in the 
face of such evidence as this, will still dare to maintain that no man can be 
saved from his sin in this life; but must daily commit sin in thought, word, and 
deed, as the Westminster divines have asserted! that is, every man is laid under 
the fatal necessity of sinning as many ways against God as the devil does 
through his natural wickedness and malice; for even the devil himself can have 
no other way of sinning against God, except by thought, word, and deed. And yet, 
according to these and others of the same creed, "even the most regenerate sin 
against God as long as they live." It is a miserable salvo to say "they do not 
sin so much as they used to do; and they do not sin habitually, only 
occasionally." Alas for this system! Could not the grace that saved them 
partially save them perfectly? Could not that power of God that saved them from 
habitual sin save them from occasional or accidental sin? Shall we suppose that 
sin, how potent soever it may be, is as potent as the Spirit and grace of 
Christ? And yet may we not ask, If it was for God's glory and their good that 
they were partially saved, would it not have been more for God's glory and their 
good if they had been perfectly saved? But the letter and spirit of God's word, 
and the design and end of Christ's coming, is to save his people from their 
sins. 

The perfection of the gospel system is not that it makes allowance for sin, but 
that it makes an atonement for it; not that it tolerates sin, but that it 
destroys it. 





CHAPTER VII. 

THE REMEDY ADEQUATE 

However inveterate the disease of sin may be, the grace of the Lord Jesus can 
fully cure it. 

God sets no bounds to the communications of his grace and Spirit to them that 
are faithful. And as there are no bounds to the graces, so there should be none 
to the exercise of those graces. No man can ever feel that he loves God too 
much, or that he loves man too much for God's sake. 

Be so purified and refined in your souls, by the indwelling Spirit, that even 
the light of God shining into your hearts shall not be able to discover a fault 
that the love of God has not purged away. 

"Be thou perfect, and thou shalt be perfections;" that is, altogether perfect: 
be just such as the holy God would have thee to be, as the almighty God can make 
thee, and live as the all-sufficient God can support thee; for He alone who 
makes the soul holy can preserve it in holiness. Our blessed Lord appears to 
have these words pointedly in view: "Ye shall be perfect, as your Father who is 
in heaven is perfect." Matt, v, 48. But what does this imply? Why, to be saved 
from all the power, the guilt, and the contamination of sin. This is only the 
negative part of salvation, but it has also a positive part; to be made perfect 
— to be perfect as our Father who is in heaven is perfect, to be filled with 
the fullness of God, to have Christ dwelling continually in the heart by faith, 
and to be rooted and grounded in love. This is the state in which man was 
created; for he was made in the image and likeness of God. This is the state 
from which man fell; for he broke the command of God. And this is the state into 
which every human soul must be raised who would dwell with God in glory; for 
Christ was incarnated and died to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. What 
a glorious privilege! And who can doubt the possibility of its attainment who 
believes in the omnipotent love of God, the infinite merit of the blood of 
atonement, and the all-pervading and all-purifying energy of the Holy Ghost? How 
many miserable souls employ that time to dispute and cavil against the 
possibility of being saved from their sins, which they should devote to praying 
and believing that they might be saved out of the hands of their enemies! But 
some may say, "You overstrain the meaning of the term; it signifies only, Be 
sincere; for, as perfect obedience is impossible, God accepts of sincere 
obedience." If by sincerity the objection means "good desires, and generally 
good purposes, with an impure heart and spotted life," then I assert that no 
such thing is implied in the text, nor in the original word. But if the word 
sincerity be taken in its proper and literal sense, I have no objection to it. 
Sincere is compounded of sine cera , "without wax;" and, applied to moral 
subjects, is a metaphor taken from clarified honey, from which every atom of the 
comb or w T ax is separated. Then let it be proclaimed from heaven, "Walk before 
me, and be sincere. Purge out the old leaven, that ye shall be perfect, as your 
Father who is in heaven is perfect." This is sincerity. Beader, remember that 
the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin. Ten thousand quibbles on insulated 
texts can never lessen, much less destroy, the merit and efficacy of the great 
atonement. 

God never gives a precept, but he offers sufficient grace to enable thee to 
perform it. Believe as he would have thee, and act as he shall strengthen thee, 
and thou wilt believe all things savingly, and do all things well. 





CHAPTER VIII. 

WHY WE SHOULD BE HOLY 

God is holy; and this is the eternal reason why all his people should be holy — 
should be purified from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of God. No faith in any particular creed, no observance, no 
acts of benevolence and charity, no mortification, attrition, or contrition, can 
be a substitute for this. We must be made partakers of the divine nature. We 
must be saved from our sins — from the corruption that is in the world, and be 
holy within and righteous without, or never see God. For this very purpose Jesus 
Christ lived, died, and revived, that he might purify us unto himself; that 
through faith in his blood our sins might be blotted out, and our souls restored 
to the image of God. Reader, art thou hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness? Then blessed art thou, for thou shalt be filled. 

God is ever ready, by the power of his Spirit, to carry us forward to every 
degree of life, light, and love, necessary to prepare us for an eternal weight 
of glory There can be little difficulty in attaining the end of our faith, the 
salvation of our souls from all sin, if God carry us forward to it; and this he 
will do, if we submit to be saved in his own way, and on his own terms. Many 
make a violent outcry against the doctrine of perfection; that is, against the 
heart being cleansed from all sin in this life, and filled with love to God and 
man; because they judge it to be impossible! Is it too much to say of these, 
that they know neither the Scripture nor the power of God? Surely the Scripture 
promises the thing, and the power of God can carry us on to the possession of 
it. 

The object of all God's promises and dispensations was to bring fallen man back 
to the image of God, which he had lost. This, indeed, is the sum and substance 
of the religion of Christ. We have partaken of an earthly, sensual, and devilish 
nature; the design of God, by Christ, is to remove this, and to make us 
partakers of the divine nature, and save us from all the corruption, in 
principle and fact, which is in the world. 

It is said that Enoch not only "walked with God," setting him always before his 
eyes — beginning, continuing, and ending every work to his glory — but also that 
"he pleased God," and had "the testimony that he did please God." Hence we learn 
that it was then possible to live so as not to offend God; consequently, so as 
not to commit sin against him, and to have the continual evidence or testimony 
that all that a man did and purposed was pleasing in the sight of Him who 
searches the heart, and by whom devices are weighed; and if it was possible 
then, it is surely through the same grace, possible now; and God, and Christ, 
and faith are still the same. 

The petition, "Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven," certainly points 
out a deliverance from all sin; for nothing that is unholy can consist with the 
Divine will; and, if this be fulfilled in man, surely sin shall be banished from 
his soul. Again; the holy angels never mingle iniquity with their loving 
obedience; and, as our Lord teaches us to pray that we do his will here as they 
do it in heaven, can it be thought he would put a petition into our mouths the 
fulfillment of which was impossible? 

The reader is probably amazed at the paucity of large stars in the whole 
firmament of heaven. Will he permit me to carry his mind a little further, and 
either stand astonished at, or deplore with me the fact that, out of the 
millions of Christians in the vicinity and splendor of the eternal Sun of 
righteousness, how very few are found of the first order! 





CHAPTER IX. 

A TEST 

How very few can stand examination by the test laid down in 1 Cor. xiii! How 
very few love God with all their heart, soul, mind, and strength, and their 
neighbor as themselves! How few mature Christians are found in the Church! How 
few are, in all things, living for eternity! How little light, how little heat, 
and how little influence and activity, are to be found among them that bear the 
name of Christ! How few stars of the first magnitude will the Son of God have to 
deck the crown of his glory! Few are striving to excel in righteousness; and it 
seems to be a principle concern with many, to find out how little grace they may 
have, and yet escape hell; how little conformity to the will of God they may 
have and yet get to heaven. In the fear of God I register this testimony, that I 
have perceived it to be the labor of many to lower the standard of Christianity, 
and to soften down, or explain away, those promises of God that himself has 
linked with duties; and, because they know they can not be saved by their good 
works, they are content to have no good works at all; and thus the necessity of 
Christian obedience, and Christian holiness, makes no prominent part of some 
modern creeds. Let all those who retain the apostolic doctrine, that the blood 
of Christ cleanseth from all sin in this life, press every believer to go on to 
perfection, and expect to be saved, while here below, into the fullness of the 
blessing of the Gospel of Jesus. To all such my soul says, Labor to show 
yourselves approved unto God; workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth; and may the pleasure of the Lord prosper in your hands! Amen. 

Many employ that time in brooding and mourning over their impure hearts, which 
should be spent in prayer and faith before God, that their impurities might be 
washed away. In what a state of nonage are many members of the Christian Church! 

I am afraid that what some persons call their infirmities may rather be called 
their strengths; the prevailing and frequently ruling power of pride, anger, ill 
will, etc.; for how few think evil tempers to be sins! The gentle term 
"infirmities" softens down the iniquity; and as St. Paul, so great and so holy a 
man, say they, had his infirmities, how can they expect to be without theirs? 
These should know that they are in a dangerous error; that St. Paul means 
nothing of the kind; for he speaks of his sufferings, and of these alone. One 
word more: would not the grace and power of Christ appear more conspicuous in 
slaying the lion than in keeping him chained? in destroying sin, root and 
branch, and filling the soul with his own holiness, with love to God and man, 
with the mind, all the holy, heavenly tempers that were in himself, than in 
leaving these impure and unholy tempers ever to live, and often to reign, in the 
heart? The doctrine is discreditable to the Gospel, and wholly anti-christian. 

"If they sin against thee, for there is no man that sinneth not." 1 Kings viii, 
46. On this verse we may observe that the second clause, as it is here 
translated, renders the supposition in the first clause entirely nugatory; for 
if there be no man that sinneth not, it is useless to say, "If they sin;" but 
this contradiction is taken away by reference to the original, which should be 
translated, "If they shall sin against thee;" or, "Should they sin against thee; 
for there is no man that may not sin;" that is, There is no man impeccable; none 
infallible; none that is not liale to transgress. This is the true meaning of 
the phrase in various parts of the Bible, and so our translators have understood 
the original; for, even in the thirty-first verse of this chapter, they have 
translated yecheta , "If a man trespass; 55 which certainly implies he might or 
might not do it; and in this way they have translated the same word, "If a soul 
sin, 55 in Lev. v, 1; vi, 2; 1 Sam. ii, 25; 2 Chron. vi, 22; and in several 
other places. The truth is, the Hebrew has no mood to express words in the 
permissive or optative way; but to express this sense, it uses the future tense 
of the conjugation kail . This text has been a wonderful stronghold for all who 
believe that there is no redemption from sin in this life; and that we can not 
be entirely freed from it till we die. 1. The text speaks no such doctrine; it 
only speaks of the possibility of every man sinning; and this must be true of a 
state of probation. 2. There is not another text in the divine records that is 
more to the purpose than this. 3. The doctrine is flatly in opposition to the 
design of the Gospel; for Jesus came to save his people from their sins, and to 
destroy the works of the devil. 4. It is a dangerous and destructive doctrine, 
and should be blotted out of every Christian's creed. There are too many who are 
seeking to excuse their crimes by all means in their power; and we need not 
embody their excuses in a creed, to complete their deception, by stating that 
their sins are un-avoidable. 

The soul was made for God, and can never be united to him, nor be happy, till 
saved from sin. He who is saved from his sin, and united to God, possesses the 
utmost felicity that the human soul can enjoy, either in this or the coming 
world. 

Where a soul is saved from all sin, it is capable of being fully employed in the 
work of the Lord: it is then, and not till then, fully fitted for the Masters 
use. 

All who are taught of Christ are not only saved, but their understandings are 
much improved. True religion, civilization, mental improvement, common sense, 
and orderly behavior, go hand in hand. 

When the light of Christ dwells fully in the heart, it extends its influence to 
every thought, word, and action; and directs its possessor how he is to act in 
all places and circumstances. 

Our souls can never be truly happy till our wills be entirely subjected to, and 
become one with, the will of God. 

While there is an empty, longing heart, there is a continual overflowing 
fountain of salvation. If we find, in any place, or at any time, that the oil 
ceases to flow, it is because there are no empty vessels there; no souls 
hungering and thirsting for righteousness. We find fault with the dispensations 
of God's mercy, and ask, "Why were the former days better than these?" Were we 
as much in earnest for our salvation as our forefathers were for theirs, we 
should have equal supplies, and as much reason to sing aloud of Divine mercy. 

"Be ye holy," saith the Lord, "for I am holy." He who can give thanks at the 
remembrance of his holiness is one who loves holiness; who hates sin; who longs 
to be saved from it, and takes encouragement at the recollection of God's 
holiness, as he seeth in this the holy nature which he is to share, and the 
perfection which he is here to attain. But most who call themselves Christians 
hate the doctrine of holiness; never hear it inculcated without pain; and the 
principal part of their studies, and those of their pastors, is to find out with 
how little holiness they can rationally expect to enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. O, fatal and soul-destroying delusion! How long will a holy God suffer 
such abominable doctrines to pollute his Church, and destroy the souls of men!

Increase in the image and favor of God. Every grace and divine influence which 
ye have received is a seed, a heavenly seed, which, if it be watered with the 
dew of heaven from above, will endlessly increase and multiply itself. He who 
continues to believe, love, and obey, will grow in grace, and continually 
increase in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, as his Sacrifice, Sanctifier, 
Counselor, Preserver, and final Savior. 





CHAPTER X. 

NECESSITY OF SANCTIFICATION 

The life of a Christian is a growth; he is at first born of God, and is a little 
child: becomes a young man and a father in Christ. Every father was once an 
infant; and, had he not grown, he would never have been a man. Those who content 
themselves with the grace they received when converted to God are, at best, in a 
continual state of infancy; but we find, in the order of nature, that the infant 
that does not grow, and grow daily, too, is sickly, and soon dies; so, in the 
order of grace, those who do not grow up into Jesus Christ are sickly, and will 
soon die — die to all sense and influence of heavenly things. There are many who 
boast of the grace of their conversion; persons who were never more than babes, 
and have long since lost even that grace, because they did not grow in it. Let 
him that readeth understand. 

In order to get a clean heart, a man must know and feel its depravity, 
acknowledge and deplore it before God, in order to be fully sanctified. Few are 
pardoned, because they do not feel and confess their sins; and few are 
sanctified and cleansed from all sin, because they do not feel and confess their 
own sore and the plague of their hearts. As the blood of Jesus Christ, the merit 
of his passion and death, applied by faith, purges the conscience from all dead 
works, so the same cleanses the heart from all unrighteousness. As all 
unrighteousness is sin, so he that is cleansed from all unrighteousness is 
cleansed from all sin. To attempt to evade this, and plead for the continuance 
of sin in the heart through life, is ungrateful, wicked, and blasphemous; for, 
as he who says he has not sinned makes God a liar, who has declared the contrary 
through every part of his revelation, so he that says the blood of Christ either 
can not or will not cleanse us from all sin in this life gives also the lie to 
his Maker, who has declared the contrary, and thus shows that the word, the 
doctrine of God, is not in him. Reader, it is the birthright of every child of 
God to be cleansed from all sin, to keep himself unspotted from the world, and 
so to live as never more to offend his Maker. All things are possible to him 
that believeth, because all things are possible to the infinitely-meritorious 
blood and energetic Spirit of the Lord Jesus. 

Every man whose heart is full of the love of God is full of humility; for there 
is no man so humble as he whose heart is cleansed from all sin. It has been said 
that indwelling sin humbles us; never was there a greater falsity; pride is the 
very essence of sin; he who has sin has pride; and pride, too, in proportion to 
his sin; this is a mere Popish doctrine; and, strange to tell, the doctrine on 
which their doctrine of merit is founded! They say, God leaves concupiscence in 
the heart of every Christian, that, in striving with and overcoming it from time 
to time, he may have an accumulation of meritorious acts. Certain Protestants 
say, "It is a true sign of a very gracious state when a man feels and deplores 
his inbred corruption." How near do these come to the Papists, whose doctrine 
they profess to detest and abhor! The truth is, it is no sign of grace whatever; 
it only argues, as they use it, that the man has got light to show him his 
corruptions, but he has not yet got grace to destroy them. He is convinced that 
he should have the mind of Christ, but he feels that he has the mind of Satan; 
he deplores it; and, if his bad doctrine do not prevent him, he will not rest 
till he feels the blood of Christ cleansing him from all sin. 

Can any man expect to be saved from his inward sin in the other wmrld? None, 
except such as hold the Popish, antiscriptural doctrine of purgatory. 





CHAPTER XI 

SOME MISCONCEPTIONS 

"But this deliverance is expected at death." Where is the promise that it shall 
then be given? There is not one such in the whole Bible. And to believe for a 
thing essential to our glorification, without any promise to support that faith 
in reference to the point on which it is exercised, is a desperation that argues 
as well the absence of true faith as it does of right reason. Multitudes of such 
persons are -continually deploring their want of faith, even where they have the 
clearest and most explicit promises; and yet, strange to tell, risk their 
salvation at the hour of death on a deliverance that is no where promised in the 
sacred oracles! "But who has got this blessing?" Every one who has come to God 
in the right way for it. "Where is such a one?" Seek the blessing as you should 
do, and you will soon be able to answer the question. "But it is too great a 
blessing to be expected." Nothing is too great for a believer to expect which 
God has promised, and Christ has purchased with his blood. "If I had such a 
blessing, I should not be able to retain it." All things are possible to him 
that believeth. Besides, like all other gifts of God, it comes with a principle 
of preservation with it: "And upon all thy glory there shall be a defense." 
"Still, such an unfaithful person as I can not expect it." Perhaps the 
infidelity you deplore came through the want of this blessing; and as to 
worthlessness, no soul under heaven deserves the least of God's mercies. It is 
not for thy worthiness that he has given thee any thing, but for the sake of his 
Son. You can say, "When I felt myself a sinner, sinking into perdition, I did 
then flee to the atoning blood, and found pardon; but this sanctification is a 
far greater work." No; speaking after the manner of men, justification is far 
greater than sanctification. When thou wert a sinner, ungodly, an enemy in thy 
mind by wicked works, a child of the devil, an heir of hell, God pardoned thee 
on thy casting thy soul on the merit of the great sacrificial Offering: thy 
sentence was reversed, thy state was changed, thou wert put among the children, 
and God's Spirit witnessed with thine that thou wert his child. What a change! 
and what a blessing! What, then, is this complete sanctification? It is the 
cleansing of the blood that has not been cleansed; it is the washing the soul of 
a true believer from the remains of sin; it is the making one who is already a 
child of God more holy, that he may be more happy, more useful in the world, and 
bring more glory to his heavenly Father. Great as this work is, how little, 
humanly speaking, is it when compared with what God has already done for thee! 
But suppose it were ten thousand times greater, is any thing too hard for God? 
Are not all things possible to him that believes? And does not the blood of 
Christ cleanse from all unrighteousness? Arise, then, and be baptized with a 
greater effusion of the Holy Ghost, and wash away thy sin, calling on the name 
of the Lord. 

Art thou weary of that carnal mind which is enmity to God? Canst thou be happy 
while thou art unholy? Dost thou know any thing of God's love to thee? Dost thou 
not know that he has given his Son to die for thee? Dost thou love him in return 
for his love? Hast thou even a little love to him? And canst thou love him a 
little, without desiring to love him more? Dost thou not feel that thy happiness 
grows in proportion to thy love and subjection to him? Dost thou not wish to be 
happy? 

And dost thou not know that holiness and happiness are as inseparable as sin and 
misery? Canst thou have too much happiness or too much holiness? Canst thou be 
made holy and happy too soon? Art thou not weary of a sinful heart? Are not thy 
bad tempers, pride, anger, peevishness fretfulness, covetousness, and the 
various unholy passions that too often agitate thy soul, a source of misery and 
woe to thee? And canst thou be unwilling to have them destroyed? Arise, then, 
and shake thyself from the dust, and call upon thy God! His ear is not heavy 
that it can not hear; his hand is not shortened that it can not save. Behold, 
now is the accepted time! Now is the day of salvation! It was necessary that 
Jesus Christ should die for thee, that thou mightest be saved; but he gave up 
his life for thee eighteen hundred years ago! and himself invites thee to come, 
for all things are now ready. Such is the nature of God that he can not be more 
willing to save thee in any future time than he is now. He wills that thou 
shouldst love him now with all thy heart; but he knows that thou canst not thus 
love him till the enmity of the carnal mind is removed; and this he is willing 
this moment to destroy. The power of the Lord is, therefore, present to heal. 
Turn from every sin; give up every idol; cut off every right hand; pluck out 
every right eye. Be willing to part with thy enemies that thou mayest receive 
thy chief friend. 

Thy day is far spent, the night is at hand, the graves are ready for thee, and 
here thou hast no abiding city. A month, a week, a day, an hour, yea, even a 
moment, may send thee into eternity. And if thou die in thy sins, where God is 
thou shalt never come. Do not expect redemption in death: it can do nothing for 
thee even under the best consideration: it is thy last enemy. Remember, then, 
that nothing but the blood of Jesus can cleanse thee from all unrighteousness. 
Lay hold, therefore, on the hope that is set before thee. The gate may appear 
strait; but Strive, and thou shalt pass through. "Come unto me," says Jesus. 
Hear his voice, believe at all risks, and struggle into God. Amen and Amen. 

In no part of the Scriptures are we directed to seek holiness gradatim. We are 
to come to God as well for an instantaneous and complete purification from all 
sin, as for an instantaneous pardon. Neither the seriatim pardon, nor the 
gradatim purification, exists in the Bible. It is when the soul is purified from 
all sin that it can properly grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: as the field may be expected to produce a good crop, and all the 
seed vegetate, when the thorns, thistles, briers, and noxious weeds of every 
kind are grubbed out of it. 





CHAPTER XII.

THE BLESSING OBTAINABLE NOW

From every view of the subject, it appears that the blessing of a clean heart, 
and the happiness consequent on it, may be obtained in this life; because here, 
not in the future world, are we to be saved. Whenever, therefore, such blessings 
are offered, they may be received. Every sinner is exhorted to turn from the 
evil of his way, to repent of sin, and supplicate the throne of grace for 
pardon. In the same moment in which he is commanded to turn, in that moment he 
may and should return. He does not receive the exhortation to repentance today 
that he may become a penitent at some future time. Every penitent is exhorted to 
believe on the Lord Jesus that he may receive remission of sins. He does not, he 
can not understand that the blessing thus promised is not to be received today, 
but at some future time. In like manner, to every believer the new heart and the 
right spirit are offered in the present moment; that they may, in that moment, 
be received. For as the work of cleansing and renewing the heart is the work of 
God, his almighty powder can perform it in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. 
And as it is this moment our duty to love God with all our heart, and we can not 
do this till he cleanse our hearts, consequently he is ready to do it at this 
moment, because he wills that we should in this moment love him. Therefore, we 
may justly say, "Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation." He who 
in the beginning caused light in a moment to shine out of darkness, can in a 
moment shine into our hearts, and give us to see the light of his glory in the 
face of Jesus Christ. This moment, therefore, we may be emptied of sin, filled 
with holiness, and become truly happy. 

Such cleansed people never forget the horrible pit and miry clay out of which 
they have been brought. And can they then be proud? No! they loathe themselves 
in their own sight. They can never forgive themselves for having sinned against 
so good a God and so loving a Savior. And can they undervalue Him by whose blood 
they were bought, and by whose blood they were cleansed? No! That is impossible: 
they now see Jesus as they ought to see him; they see him in his splendor, 
because they feel him in his victory and triumph over sin. To them that thus 
believe he is precious; and he was never so precious as now. As to their not 
needing him when thus saved from their sins, we may as well say, As soon may the 
creation not need the sustaining hand of God, because the works are finished! 
Learn this, that as it requires the same power to sustain creation as to produce 
it, so it requires the same Jesus who cleansed to keep clean. They feel that it 
is only through his continued indwelling that they are kept holy, and happy, and 
useful. Were he to leave them, the original darkness and kingdom of death would 
soon be restored. 





The Way of Holiness
By
Phoebe Palmer 

This remarkable work is a clear
portrayal of the way of holiness
as experienced and exemplified in
the life of the sainted Phoebe Palmer.
No more definite testimony to the
power of God through faith can be
found than is here given. 

No one can afford to be without
this book. 

64 pp., paper cover, 10c.; pebble cloth, 15c.; 

Publishing House of the
Pentecostal Chuech of the Nazaeene
2109 Troost Ave.
Kansas City
Mo.